Align Enterprise-Managed Authorization with id-jag-04 and promote to stable (#29)
modelcontextprotocol/ext-auth: specification/stable/enterprise-managed-authorization.mdx

This document uses the roles and terms defined in [Section 2 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-2). In the context of this profile:

- The **Client** is the MCP Client.
- The **Resource Server** is the MCP Server.
- The **Resource Authorization Server** is the authorization server that issues access tokens for the MCP Server, as advertised in the MCP Server's Protected Resource Metadata ([RFC9728](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728)).
- The **IdP Authorization Server (IdP)** is the enterprise Identity Provider used for single sign-on.

## 2. Identity Assertion Authorization Grant Overview

This profile is an application of the "Identity Assertion JWT Authorization Grant" [draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant/), which itself is a profile of "Identity Chaining Across Trust Domains" [draft-ietf-oauth-identity-chaining](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-chaining/).

The Identity Assertion JWT Authorization Grant follows three steps:

> 1. Single Sign-On to the MCP Client via OpenID Connect or SAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Single Sign-On to the MCP Client via OpenID Connect or SAML
1a. optionally exchange the SAML assertion for a Refresh Token
```

2. Token Exchange ([RFC8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693))
3. JWT Authorization Grant ([RFC7523](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7523))

The core flow is as follows:

- A user logs in to an MCP Client through their enterprise Identity Provider, resulting in an Identity Assertion (ID Token or SAML assertion) being issued to the MCP Client.

> - The MCP Client sends a Token Exchange [[RFC8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)] request to the Identity Provider including the identity assertion and identifier of the MCP Server it is attempting to access, and obtains a Identity Assertion JWT Authorization Grant (ID-JAG).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For SAML:
    - The MCP Client sends a Token Exchange request to the Identity Provider with the SAML assertion, and obtains a Refresh Token.
- The MCP Client sends a Token Exchange [[RFC8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)] request to the Identity Provider including the ID Token or Refresh Token, and the identifier of the MCP Server it is attempting to access, and obtains a Identity Assertion JWT Authorization Grant (ID-JAG).
```

The enterprise IdP may enforce additional security controls such as multi-factor authentication before granting the user access to the MCP Client.
For example, in an OpenID Connect flow, after receiving a redirect from the IdP with an authorization code, the MCP Client makes a request to the IdP's token endpoint and, if valid, receives the tokens in the response:

```
POST /token HTTP/1.1
Host: acme.idp.example
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=authorization_code
&code=.....

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "id_token": "eyJraWQiOiJzMTZ0cVNtODhwREo4VGZCXzdrSEtQ...",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "access_token": "7SliwCQP1brGdjBtsaMnXo",
  "scope": "openid"
}
```

## 4. Token Exchange

To request an ID-JAG, the MCP Client makes a Token Exchange request to the IdP's token endpoint as defined in [Section 4.3 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-4.3).

In this profile:

- `audience` **MUST** be the issuer identifier of the Resource Authorization Server.

> - `resource` is **REQUIRED** and **MUST** be the Resource Identifier of the MCP Server as defined in [RFC9728](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `resource` is **OPTIONAL** and if set, **MUST** be the Resource Identifier of the MCP Server as defined in [RFC9728](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9728).
```

Feels like we should make this "optional" right now since that's how the implementations currently work.

Author: Yea, I debated that... I'd like it if this were required, but I agree matching what's out there makes sense for the moment.

Reviewer 2: 247253

Reviewer 2: 247253

Reviewer 2: 247253

If the IdP requires client authentication when the MCP Client performs OpenID Connect for single sign-on, then client authentication of the Token Exchange request is also required.

The example below illustrates the Token Exchange request, using an OpenID Connect ID Token as the Identity Assertion and a client secret as the client authentication method. The ID token is passed as a Subject Token.

```
POST /oauth2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: acme.idp.example
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

grant_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:token-exchange
&requested_token_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:id-jag
&audience=https://auth.chat.example/
&resource=https://mcp.chat.example/
&scope=chat.read+chat.history
&subject_token=eyJraWQiOiJzMTZ0cVNtODhwREo4VGZCXzdrSEtQ...
&subject_token_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:id_token
&client_id=2ec954a1d60620116d36d9ceb7
&client_secret=a26d84873504215a34a86d52ef5cd64f4b76
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If the client uses SAML for single sign-on to the IdP, see [Section 4.5](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-4.5) for details on how the client can exchange the SAML assertion for a refresh token, then use the refresh token to request an ID-JAG.
```

### 4.2 Token Exchange Response

If access is granted, the IdP returns the ID-JAG in a token exchange response as defined in [Section 4.3.4 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-4.3.4):

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store
Pragma: no-cache

{
  "issued_token_type": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:id-jag",
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsI...",
  "token_type": "N_A",
  "scope": "chat.read chat.history",
  "expires_in": 300
}
```

Error responses are returned as OAuth 2.0 Token Error responses per [Section 5.2 of RFC6749](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-5.2).

### 4.3 Identity Assertion JWT Authorization Grant

The ID-JAG is a JWT issued and signed by the IdP with the claims defined in [Section 3.1 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-3.1).

> In this profile, the `resource` claim is **REQUIRED** and **MUST** contain the Resource Identifier of the MCP Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this profile, the `resource` claim **MUST** contain the Resource Identifier of the MCP Server if present.
```

An example JWT shown with expanded header and payload claims may look like this:

```
{
  "typ": "oauth-id-jag+jwt"
}
.
{
  "jti": "9e43f81b64a33f20116179",
  "iss": "https://acme.idp.example",

>   "sub": "U019488227",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "sub": "U019488227",
  "email": "user@example.com",
```

  "aud": "https://auth.chat.example/",
  "resource": "https://mcp.chat.example/",
  "client_id": "f53f191f9311af35",
  "exp": 1311281970,
  "iat": 1311280970,
  "scope": "chat.read chat.history"
}
.
signature
```

See [Section 6 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-6) for handling of multi-tenant issuers and subject identifier uniqueness.

## 5. Access Token Request

The MCP Client presents the ID-JAG to the Resource Authorization Server's token endpoint as defined in [Section 4.4 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-4.4), using `grant_type` `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer` and the ID-JAG as the `assertion`.

The MCP Client authenticates with its credentials as registered with the Resource Authorization Server.

> If the MCP Client has not yet registered with the Resource Authorization Server, then it can do a [Dynamic Client Registration](/specification/draft/basic/authorization#dynamic-client-registration) request at this stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the MCP Client is not pre-registered with the Resource Authorization Server, then it can use its [Client ID Metadata Document](/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization#client-id-metadata-documents) as its client ID, and optionally authenticate using [private_key_jwt](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-client-id-metadata-document-01.html#section-6.2).
```

An example request may look like this:

```
POST /oauth2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: auth.chat.example

> Authorization: Basic yZS1yYW5kb20tc2VjcmV0v3JOkF0XG5Qx2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

grant_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer

> assertion=eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsI...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&assertion=eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsI...
&client_id=https://client.example.com/client.json
```

In this profile, the issued access token **MUST** be audience-restricted to the MCP Server identified by the `resource` claim in the ID-JAG.

### 5.2 Access Token Response

The Resource Authorization Server responds with an OAuth 2.0 Token Response, like this:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: no-store

{
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "access_token": "2YotnFZFEjr1zCsicMWpAA",
  "expires_in": 86400,
  "scope": "chat.read chat.history"
}
```

## 6. Discovery

An MCP Client can determine that a Resource Authorization Server supports this profile by checking for `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-profile:id-jag` in the `authorization_grant_profiles_supported` field of the server's authorization server metadata, as defined in [Section 7.2 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-7.2).

## 7. Security Considerations

### 7.1 Client Registration

In most enterprise deployments, the IdP policy will only allow users to sign in to pre-registered clients. The MCP client will likely need to be pre-registered with the enterprise IdP for single sign-on.

> It is also assumed that the MCP client will be pre-registered with the Resource Authorization Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: hmm yea we might want to follow up a section on CIMD / private client for how this works. agreed on removing this line

See [Section 5 of draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant-04.html#section-5) for how the IdP determines the `client_id` value to include in the ID-JAG.

### 7.2 Scope of Enterprise Visibility and Policy Enforcement

> This specification enables the enterprise IdP to be part of the issuance of the access token at the MCP Server. The visibility the IdP has between the MCP Client and MCP Server is limited to the process of issuing the access token, but does not extend to the actual API calls between the MCP Client and Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification enables the enterprise IdP to be part of the issuance of the access token at the MCP Server. The visibility the IdP has between the MCP Client and MCP Server is limited to the process of issuing the access token, but does not extend to the actual MCP traffic between the MCP Client and Server.
```
